| No. | Topic                                                       |
| --- | ----------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1   | [Introduction to C#](#introduction-to-c)                    |
| 2   | [Object-Oriented Programming](#object-oriented-programming) |
| 3   | [Event-Driven Programming](#event-driven-programming)       |
| 4   | [Visual Programming](#visual-programming)                   |
| 5   | [Generic Programming](#generic-programming)                 |
| 6   | [Functional Programming](#functional-programming)           |
| 7   | [Microsoft's .NET](#microsofts-net)                         |
| 8   | [.NET Framework](#net-framework)                            |
| 9   | [Common Language Runtime](#common-language-runtime)         |
| 10  | [Language Interoperability](#language-interoperability)     |

# Introduction to C#

- In 2000, Microsoft announced the C# programming language.
- C# has roots in the C, C++ and Java programming languages.

## Object-Oriented Programming

- C# is object oriented.
- C# has access to the powerful .NET Framework Class Library—a vast collection
  of prebuilt classes that enable you to develop apps quickly
- Some key capabilities in the NET Framework Class Library

|                   |                 |                     |                                |
| ----------------- | --------------- | ------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| Database          | Debugging       | Computer networking | Web communication              |
| Building web apps | Multithreading  | Permissions         | Graphical user interface       |
| Graphics          | File processing | Mobile              | Data structures                |
| Input/output      | Security        | String processing   | Universal Windows Platform GUI |

- The .NET Framework allows C# to operate seamlessly with Windows so that
  programs can make use of familiar Windows features.

## Event-Driven Programming

- C# graphical user interfaces (GUIs) are event driven.
- You can write programs that respond to user-initiated events such as mouse
  clicks, keystrokes, timer expirations and touches and finger swipes—gestures
  that are widely used on smartphones and tablets.

## Visual Programming

- Microsoft's Visual Studio enables you to use C# as a visual programming
  language.
- You'll use Visual Studio to conveniently drag and drop predefined GUI objects
  like buttons and textboxes into place on your screen, and label and resize
  them.
- Visual Studio will write much of the GUI code for you.

## Generic Programming

- It's common to write a program that processes a collection of things.
- Historically, you had to program separately to handle each type of collection.
- With generic programming, you write code that handles a collection "in the
  general" and C# handles the specifics for each different type of collection.

## Functional Programming

- With functional programming, you specify what you want to accomplish in a
  task, but not how to accomplish it.
- For example, with Microsoft's LINQ you can say, "Here's a collection of
  numbers, give me the sum of its elements."
- You do not need to specify the mechanics of walking through the elements and
  adding them into a running total one at a time—LINQ handles all that for you.
- Functional programming speeds application development and reduces errors.

## Microsoft's .NET

- In 2000, Microsoft announced its .NET initiative (www.microsoft.com/net), a
  broad vision for using the Internet and the web in the development,
  engineering, distribution and use of software.
- Rather than forcing you to use a single programming language, .NET permits you
  to create apps in any .NET-compatible language (such as C#, Visual Basic,
  Visual C++ and others).

## .NET Framework

- The .NET Framework Class Library provides many capabilities that you'll use to
  build substantial C# apps quickly and easily.
- It contains thousands of valuable prebuilt classes that have been tested and
  tuned to maximize performance.
- You should re-use the .NET Framework classes whenever possible to speed up the
  software-development process, while enhancing the quality and performance of
  the software you develop.

## Common Language Runtime

- The Common Language Runtime (CLR) executes .NET programs and provides
  functionality to make them easier to develop and debug.
- The CLR is a virtual machine (VM)—software that manages the execution of
  programs and hides from them the underlying operating system and hardware.
- The source code for programs that are executed and managed by the CLR is
  called managed code.
- The CLR provides various services to managed code integrating software
  components written in different .NET languages, error handling between such
  components, enhanced security, automatic memory management and more.
- Unmanaged-code programs do not have access to the CLR's services, which makes
  unmanaged code more difficult to write.
- Managed code is compiled into machine-specific instructions in the following
  steps:
  - First, the code is compiled into Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL).
  - Code converted into MSIL from other languages and sources can be woven
    together by the CLR—this allows programmers to work in their preferred .NET
    programming language.
  - The MSIL for an app's components is placed into the app's executable file—
    the file that causes the computer to perform the app's tasks.
  - When the app executes, another compiler (known as the just-in-time compiler
    or JIT compiler) in the CLR translates the MSIL in the executable file into
    machine-language code (for a particular platform).
  - The machine-language code executes on that platform.

## Language Interoperability

- The .NET Framework provides a high level of language interoperability.
- Because software components written in different .NET languages (such as C#
  and Visual Basic) are all compiled into MSIL, the components can be combined
  to create a single unified program.
- Thus, MSIL allows the .NET Framework to be language independent.
