| No. | Topic                                                                                         |
| --- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1   | [Databases and Secure Passwords](#databases-and-secure-passwords)                             |
| 2   | [The Trivial Approach](#the-trivial-approach)                                                 |
| 3   | [Advantages of Storing in Plain-Text](#advantages-of-storing-in-plain-text)                   |
| 4   | [Disadvantages of Storing in Plain-Text](#disadvantages-of-storing-in-plain-text)             |
| 5   | [Is Storing in Plaintext Acceptable?](#is-storing-in-plaintext-acceptable)                    |
| 6   | [Encrypting Passwords](#encrypting-passwords)                                                 |
| 7   | [Password Retrieval](#password-retrieval)                                                     |
| 8   | [Advantages of Scrambling Passwords](#advantages-of-scrambling-passwords)                     |
| 9   | [Disadvantages of Scrambling Passwords](#disadvantages-of-scrambling-passwords)               |
| 10  | [Is Scrambling a Password Acceptable?](#is-scrambling-a-password-acceptable)                  |
| 11  | [Storing Hashed Passwords](#storing-hashed-passwords)                                         |
| 12  | [One Way Functions](#one-way-functions)                                                       |
| 13  | [Using a Password Hash](#using-a-password-hash)                                               |
| 14  | [How Hashes are Cracked](#how-hashes-are-cracked)                                             |
| 15  | [Dictionary and Brute Force Attacks](#dictionary-and-brute-force-attacks)                     |
| 16  | [Dictionary Attacks](#dictionary-attacks)                                                     |
| 17  | [Preventing Dictionary or Brute Force Attacks](#preventing-dictionary-or-brute-force-attacks) |
| 18  | [Lookup Tables](#lookup-tables)                                                               |
| 19  | [Reverse Lookup Tables](#reverse-lookup-tables)                                               |
| 20  | [Rainbow Tables](#rainbow-tables)                                                             |
| 21  | [Advantages of Storing Hashed Passwords](#advantages-of-storing-hashed-passwords)             |
| 22  | [Disadvantages of Storing Hashed Passwords](#disadvantages-of-storing-hashed-passwords)       |
| 23  | [Is Storing Hashed Passwords Acceptable?](#is-storing-hashed-passwords-acceptable)            |
| 24  | [Adding Salt](#adding-salt)                                                                   |
| 25  | [Table Salt](#table-salt)                                                                     |
| 26  | [Salt Reuse](#salt-reuse)                                                                     |
| 27  | [Short Salt](#short-salt)                                                                     |
| 28  | [The Wrong Way to Hash](#the-wrong-way-to-hash)                                               |
| 29  | [Is it So Wrong?](#is-it-so-wrong)                                                            |
| 30  | [Hash Collisions](#hash-collisions)                                                           |
| 31  | [Properly Hashing with Salt](#properly-hashing-with-salt)                                     |
| 32  | [Unique Salt](#unique-salt)                                                                   |
| 33  | [Using a Password Hash](#using-a-password-hash-1)                                             |
| 34  | [Making Password Cracking Harder](#making-password-cracking-harder)                           |
| 35  | [Key Stretching](#key-stretching)                                                             |
| 36  | [Length-Constant Time](#length-constant-time)                                                 |
| 37  | [Timing Attacks](#timing-attacks)                                                             |
| 38  | [SlowEquals Code](#slowequals-code)                                                           |
| 39  | [How SlowEquals Works](#how-slowequals-works)                                                 |
| 40  | [Why Use XOR](#why-use-xor)                                                                   |
| 41  | [Why Use PBKDF2?](#why-use-pbkdf2)                                                            |
| 42  | [Why Bother Hashing?](#why-bother-hashing)                                                    |

# Databases and Secure Passwords

- Most websites nowadays need to maintain a list of users and passwords.
- Many multi-user applications require a way to authenticate users, and
  passwords are the natural way to do this.
- Alternatives to a username/password authentication solution include:
  - Active Directory
  - for Microsoft domains
  - Microsoft Passport
  - Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  - for non-Microsoft environments
  - The membership framework provided in .NET

## The Trivial Approach

- The simplest approach to manage user names and passwords is to store
  everything in plain-text (no encryption) in a file or database.
- The result would be something like this:

  | UserID | User Name | Password  |
  | ------ | --------- | --------- |
  | 101    | Bob       | Snake     |
  | 102    | Carol     | Rainbow6  |
  | 103    | Ted       | DarkTower |
  | 104    | Alice     | Snake     |

## Advantages of Storing in Plain-Text

1. Authenticating (checking that the username and password pair matches the pair
   in the table) is very easy, just compare the strings.
2. Forgotten passwords can be retrieved, the password is easily accessible,
   given the user name.

## Disadvantages of Storing in Plain-Text

1. Anyone with access to the file (or able to SELECT from the table) gains
   immediate access to all passwords.

- An employee with legitimate access to the file might print the file or email
  out the information and immediately all the passwords are compromised.
- The built-in encryption that comes with SQL is not good enough because it only
  protects the information on disk.
- If a user is allowed to access the data (perform a SELECT), SQL will
  automatically decrypt the information.

2. Unless secure communication is used throughout the network, the password can
   be seen while authenticating.

- Even if a web application uses SSL to submit the password, the password is
  still visible when the web application server SELECTs the information from the
  remote database.
- The results of the query are transferred unencrypted over the network.

## Is Storing in Plaintext Acceptable?

- If your data store is encrypted,
- And your internal communication network is highly secure (uses only IPSEC or a
  VPN tunnel for communication between servers),
- And you only use secure communication between the application client and the
  application server,
- And you trust all employees with database access to never make mistakes (such
  as printing the password information or storing to file),
- And you are sure nobody else has physical access to any of the servers used.
- Then yes, storing passwords in plaintext is fine.

## Encrypting Passwords

- A better approach for storing passwords (and the only viable alternative if
  users need to be able to recover passwords) is scrambling the passwords before
  storing them.
- This approach relies on having a secret. The secret is either the scrambling
  algorithm, or the key used in conjunction with a modern encryption algorithm.
- Scrambling (or encrypting) passwords is a reversible operation.
- The secret is used to garble the password, and the same secret can be used to
  retrieve the original password.
- When a user supplies a password, the stored password is de-scrambled using the
  secret, and the passwords are compared.
- Alternatively, the provided password can be scrambled using the secret and
  compare the two garbled versions.
- A match indicates the provided password was good.

## Password Retrieval

- If a user needs to retrieve a password, the stored password is descrambled and
  provided to the user (usually via email).

  | UserID | User Name    | Password |
  | ------ | ------------ | -------- |
  | 101    | Bob          | k468dD8F |
  | 102    | Carol 56lkV# | p6       |
  | 103    | Ted          | 8Fk4lVQ0 |
  | 104    | Alice        | k468dD8F |

## Advantages of Scrambling Passwords

1. A forgotten or lost password can be retrieved.
2. Only a single secret needs to be stored securely (either an algorithm or a
   key).
3. For multi-user distributed applications, when using encryption, either the
   clear text password needs to be communicated (to be checked), or the secret
   must be communicated to perform the authentication on the front end.

## Disadvantages of Scrambling Passwords

1. If the secret is compromised, all passwords are compromised.

- If somebody has access to the secret and to the password store, all passwords
  can be unscrambled.

2. Access to the password store alone is sufficient to provide information about
   the passwords.

- Since all passwords are scrambled using the same algorithm, if two users share
  the same scrambled password, the must have the same password as well.
- Crafty hackers with access to the password store can create users with known
  passwords and check for other users with the same password.

## Is Scrambling a Password Acceptable?

- If lost password retrieval is a must, then this is the only acceptable
  solution.
- However:
  - Store the secret in a secure place.
  - Do not hard-code the secret in the application code but store it in a
    database.
  - Use a good cryptographic algorithm, and not your own.
  - Use a salt to prevent two users with the same password from having the same
    scrambled password.
  - Encryption output is binary and must be encoded if stored as text.

## Storing Hashed Passwords

- A cryptographic hash is a one-way function.
- A hash function takes input of any length and produces a unique output of
  constant length.
- If a password of any length is hashed using the MD5 cryptographic hash, the
  result will be a 128-bit number that uniquely corresponds to the password.
- As computing power has increased over the years, some cryptographic hash
  functions are no longer recommended.
- When storing hashed passwords, the password is hashed, and the resulting hash
  is stored instead of the password.
- To compare passwords, just hash the given password using the same hash
  function and compare the results.
- If the hashes are the same, the passwords match.

## One Way Functions

- The beauty of a one-way function is that there is no way to compute the
  password based on the hash.
- They cannot be reversed.
- If the input changes by even a tiny bit, the resulting hash is completely
  different.
- Hashed passwords are not immune to brute force attacks.
- Given a dictionary and the password hash, a hacker can compute the hashes of
  all the words in the dictionary, compare the words with the password hash, and
  discover the password.
- This is where strong passwords (containing letters, numbers, and special
  characters) help defend against brute force attacks.

## Using a Password Hash

- The general flow for registration and authentication in a hash-based account
  system is:

1. The user creates an account.
2. Their password is hashed and stored in the database.

- At no point is the plain-text password ever written to the hard drive.

3. When the user attempts to login, the hash of the password they entered is
   checked against the hash of their real password as retrieved from the
   database.
4. If the hashes match, the user is granted access. If not, the user is told
   they entered invalid login credentials.

- Never tell the user if it was the username or the password they got wrong.
- Always display a generic message.

5. Steps 3 and 4 repeat every time someone tries to login to their account.

## How Hashes are Cracked

- It's easy to think that all one needs to do is run the password through a
  cryptographic hash and the users' passwords will be secure.
- However, there are many ways to recover passwords from plain hashes very
  quickly.
  - Dictionary and Brute Force Attacks
  - Lookup Tables
  - Reverse Lookup Tables
  - Rainbow Tables

## Dictionary and Brute Force Attacks

- The simplest way to crack a hash is to try to guess the password, hashing each
  guess, and checking if the guess's hash equals the hash being cracked.
- If the hashes are equal, the guess is the password.
- The two most common ways of guessing passwords are dictionary attacks and
  brute-force attacks.

## Dictionary Attacks

- A dictionary attack uses a file containing words, phrases, common passwords,
  and other strings that are likely to be used in a password.
- Each word in the file is hashed, and its hash is compared to the password
  hash.
- These dictionary files are constructed by extracting words from large bodies
  of text, and even from real databases of passwords.
- Further processing is often applied to dictionary files, such as replacing
  words with their "leet speak" equivalents ("hello" becomes "h3110"), to make
  them more effective.
  - Trying apple : failed
  - Trying blueberry : failed
  - Trying justinbeiber : failed
  - ...
  - Trying letmein : failed
  - Trying s3cr3t : success!
  - Brute Force Attacks
- A brute-force attack tries every possible combination of characters up to a
  given length.
- These attacks are very computationally expensive and are usually the least
  efficient in terms of hashes cracked per processor time, but they will
  eventually find the password.
- Passwords should be long enough that searching through all possible character
  string to find it will take too long to be worthwhile.
  - Trying aaaa : failed
  - Trying aaab : failed
  - Trying aaac : failed
  - ...
  - Trying acdb : failed
  - Trying acdc : success!

## Preventing Dictionary or Brute Force Attacks

- There is no way to prevent dictionary or brute force attacks.
- They can be made less effective, but there isn't a way to prevent them
  altogether.
- If your password hashing system is secure, the only way to crack the hashes
  will be to run a dictionary or brute-force attack on each hash.

## Lookup Tables

- Lookup tables are an extremely effective method for cracking many hashes of
  the same type very quickly.
- The general idea is to pre-compute the hashes of the passwords in a password
  dictionary and store them, and their corresponding password, in a lookup table
  data structure.
- A good implementation of a lookup table can process hundreds of hash lookups
  per second, even when they contain many billions of hashes.
  - Searching: `5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99` : FOUND: `password5`
  - Searching: `6cbe615c106f422d23669b610b564800` : not in database
  - Searching: `630bf032efe4507f2c57b280995925a9` : FOUND: `letMEin12`
  - Searching: `386f43fab5d096a7a66d67c8f213e5ec` : FOUND: `mcd0nalds`
  - Searching: `d5ec75d5fe70d428685510fae36492d9` : FOUND: `p@ssw0rd!`

## Reverse Lookup Tables

- This attack allows an attacker to apply a dictionary or brute-force attack to
  many hashes at the same time, without having to pre-compute a lookup table.
- First, the attacker creates a lookup table that maps each password hash from
  the compromised user account database to a list of users who had that hash.
- The attacker then hashes each password guess and uses the lookup table to get
  a list of users whose password was the attacker's guess.
- This attack is especially effective because it is common for many users to
  have the same password.
  - Searching for hash(apple) in users' hash list... : Matches [alice3, 0bob0,
    charles8]
  - Searching for hash(blueberry) in users' hash list... : Matches [usr10101,
    timmy, john91]
  - Searching for hash(letmein) in users' hash list... : Matches [wilson10,
    dragonslayerX, joe1984]
  - Searching for hash(s3cr3t) in users' hash list... : Matches [bruce19,
    knuth1337, john87]
  - Searching for hash(z@29hjja) in users' hash list... : No users used this
    password

## Rainbow Tables

- Rainbow tables are a time-memory trade-off technique.
- They are like lookup tables, except that they sacrifice hash cracking speed to
  make the lookup tables smaller.
- Because they are smaller, the solutions to more hashes can be stored in the
  same amount of space, making them more effective.
- Rainbow tables that can crack any md5 hash of a password up to 8 characters
  long exist.

## Advantages of Storing Hashed Passwords

1. The original clear text password is never stored. Even if the password store
   is compromised, only the hashes become public.

2. The password length is not stored and cannot be estimated, making password
   cracking that much harder.

3. There is no need for a secret, as none is used to hash the password.

## Disadvantages of Storing Hashed Passwords

1. Lost passwords cannot be recovered (except using brute force methods).

- A new password must be created and communicated to the user.

2. Like encrypted passwords, if a salt is not used, users with the same password
   will have the same password hash.

## Is Storing Hashed Passwords Acceptable?

- Yes, but:
  - Use a good cryptographic hash. MD5 is no longer recommended, and neither is
    SHA1. SHA2 is the current favorite.
  - Use a salt to prevent two users with the same password from having the same
    password hash.
  - Hash output is binary and must be encoded if stored as text.

## Adding Salt

- Lookup tables and rainbow tables only work because each password is hashed the
  exact same way.
- If two users have the same password, they'll have the same password hashes.
- These attacks can be prevented by randomizing each hash, so that when the same
  password is hashed twice, the hashes are not the same.
- Hashes are randomized by appending or prepending a random string, called a
  salt, to the password before hashing.
- This makes the same password hash into a completely different string every
  time.
- To check if the password is correct, we need the salt, so it is usually stored
  in the user account database along with the hash, or as part of the hash
  string itself.
  ```console
  hash("hello") = 2cf24dba5fb0a30e26e83b2ac5b9e29e1b161e5c1fa7425e73043362938b9824
  hash("hello" + "QxLUF1bgIAdeQX") = 9e209040c863f84a31e719795b2577523954739fe5ed3b58a75cff2127075ed1
  hash("hello" + "bv5PehSMfV11Cd") = d1d3ec2e6f20fd420d50e2642992841d8338a314b8ea157c9e18477aaef226ab
  hash("hello" + "YYLmfY6IehjZMQ") = a49670c3c18b9e079b9cfaf51634f563dc8ae3070db2c4a8544305df1b60f007
  ```

## Table Salt

- The salt does not need to be secret.
- Just by randomizing the hashes, lookup tables, reverse tables, and rainbow
  tables become ineffective.
- An attacker won't know in advance what the salt will be, so they can't
  pre-compute a lookup table or rainbow table.
- If each user's password is hashed with a different salt, the reverse lookup
  table won't work either.

## Salt Reuse

- A common mistake is to use the same salt in each hash.
- Either the salt is hard-coded into the program or is generated randomly once.
- This is ineffective because if two users have the same password, they'll still
  have the same hash.
- An attacker can still use a reverse lookup table attack to run a dictionary
  attack on every hash at the same time.
- They just have to apply the salt to each password guess before they hash it.
- If the salt is hard-coded into a popular product, lookup tables and rainbow
  tables can be built for that salt, to make it easier to crack hashes generated
  by the product.
- A new random salt must be generated each time a user creates an account or
  changes their password.

## Short Salt

- If the salt is too short, an attacker can build a lookup table for every
  possible salt.
- If the salt is only three ASCII characters, there are only 95x95x95 = 857,375
  possible salts.
- That may seem like a lot, but if each lookup table contains only 1MB of the
  most common passwords, collectively they will only be 837GB, which is not a
  lot considering 1000GB hard drives can be bought for under $100 today.
- For the same reason, the username shouldn't be used as salt.
- Usernames may be unique to a single service, but they are predictable and
  often reused for accounts on other services.
- An attacker can build lookup tables for common usernames and use them to crack
  username-salted hashes.
- To make it impossible for an attacker to create a lookup table for every
  possible salt, the salt must be long.

## The Wrong Way to Hash

- A common password hashing misconception is to use wacky combinations of hash
  algorithms.
- It's easy to get carried away and try to combine different hash functions,
  hoping that the result will be more secure.
- In practice, though, there is very little benefit to doing it.
- All it does is create interoperability problems and can sometimes even make
  the hashes less secure.
- Never try to invent your own crypto; always use a standard that has been
  designed by experts.

## Is it So Wrong?

- An argument is that it's less likely for an attacker to have precomputed a
  rainbow table for the wacky hash function, and it takes longer to compute the
  hash function.
- An attacker cannot attack a hash when he doesn't know the algorithm, but note
  [Kirchhoff's principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerckhoffs's_principle),
  that the attacker will usually have access to the source code, and that given
  a few password-hash pairs from the target system, it is not difficult to
  reverse engineer the algorithm.
- It does take longer to compute wacky hash functions, but only by a small
  constant factor.
- It's better to use an iterated algorithm that's designed to be extremely hard
  to parallelize.
- And properly salting the hash solves the rainbow table problem.
- Compare these minor benefits to the risks of accidentally implementing a
  completely insecure hash function and the interoperability problems wacky
  hashes create.
- It's clearly best to use a standard and well-tested algorithm.

## Hash Collisions

- Because hash functions map arbitrary amounts of data to fixed-length strings,
  there must be some inputs that hash into the same string.
- Cryptographic hash functions are designed to make these collisions incredibly
  difficult to find.
- From time to time, cryptographers find "attacks" on hash functions that make
  finding collisions easier.
- A recent example is the MD5 hash function, for which collisions have actually
  been found.
- Collision attacks are a sign that it may be more likely for a string other
  than the user's password to have the same hash.
- However, finding collisions in even a weak hash function like MD5 requires a
  lot of dedicated computing power, so it is very unlikely that these collisions
  will happen "by accident" in practice.
- A password hashed using MD5 and salt is, for all practical purposes, just as
  secure as if it were hashed with SH256 and salt.
- Nevertheless, it is a good idea to use a more secure hash function like
  SHA256, SHA512, RipeMD, or WHIRLPOOL if possible.

## Properly Hashing with Salt

- Salt should be generated using a Cryptographically Secure PseudoRandom Number
  Generator (CSPRNG).
- CSPRNGs are very different than ordinary pseudo-random number generators, like
  the VB.NET language's `Random.Next()` function.
- As the name suggests, CSPRNGs are designed to be cryptographically secure,
  meaning the provide a high level of randomness and are completely
  unpredictable.
- We don't want our salts to be predictable, so we must use a CSPRNG.

| Platform                          | CSPRNG                                                                                                                                                                       |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| PHP                               | [mcrypt_create_iv](http://php.net/manual/en/function.mcrypt-create-iv.php), [openssl_random_pseudo_bytes](http://php.net/manual/en/function.openssl-random-pseudo-bytes.php) |
| Java                              | [java.security.SecureRandom](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/security/SecureRandom.html)                                                                       |
| Dot NET (C#, VB)                  | [System.Security.Cryptography.RNGCryptoServiceProvider](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.security.cryptography.rngcryptoserviceprovider.aspx)                  |
| Ruby                              | [SecureRandom](http://rubydoc.info/stdlib/securerandom/1.9.3/SecureRandom)                                                                                                   |
| Python                            | [os.urandom](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html)                                                                                                                      |
| Perl                              | [Math::Random::Secure](http://search.cpan.org/-mkanat/Math-Random-Secure-0.06/lib/Math/Random/Secure.pm)                                                                     |
| C/C++ (Windows API)               | [CryptGenRandom](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CryptGenRandom)                                                                                                                |
| Any language on GNU/Linux or Unix | Read from [/dev/random](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/dev/random) or [/dev/urandom](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/dev/urandom)                                                 |

## Unique Salt

- The salt needs to be unique per-user per-password.
- Every time a user creates an account or changes their password, the password
  should be hashed using a new random salt.
- Never reuse a salt.
- The salt also needs to be long, so that there are many possible salts.
- As a rule of thumb, make your salt at least as long as the hash function's
  output.
- SHA256's output is 256 bits or 32 bytes, so the salt should also be 32 bytes.
- The salt should be stored in the user account table alongside the hash.

## Using a Password Hash

- To Store a Password:

1. Generate a long random salt using a CSPRNG.
2. Prepend the salt to the password and hash it with a standard cryptographic
   hash function such as SHA256.
3. Save both the salt and the hash in the user's database record.

- To Validate a Password:

1. Retrieve the user's salt and hash from the database.
2. Prepend the salt to the given password and hash it using the same hash
   function.
3. Compare the hash of the given password with the hash from the database.

- If they match, the password is correct. Otherwise, the password is incorrect.

## Making Password Cracking Harder

- Salt ensures that attackers can't use specialized attacks like lookup tables
  and rainbow tables to crack large collections of hashes quickly, but it
  doesn't prevent them from running dictionary or brute-force attacks on each
  hash individually.
- High-end graphics cards (GPUs) and custom hardware can compute billions of
  hashes per second, so these attacks are still very effective.
- To make these attacks less effective, we can use a technique known as key
  stretching.
- The idea is to make the hash function very slow, so that even with a fast GPU
  or custom hardware, dictionary and brute-force attacks are too slow to be
  worthwhile.
- The goal is to make the hash function slow enough to impede attacks, but still
  fast enough to not cause a noticeable delay for the user.

## Key Stretching

- Key stretching is implemented using a special type of CPU-intensive hash
  function.
- Don't try to invent your own; Simple iteratively hashing the hash of the
  password isn't enough as it can be parallelized in hardware and executed as
  fast as a normal hash.
- Use a standard algorithm like [PBKDF2](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PBKDF2) or
  [bcrypt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bcrypt).
- These algorithms take a security factor or iteration count as an argument.
- This value determines how slow the hash function will be.
- For desktop software or smartphone apps, the best way to choose this parameter
  is to run a short benchmark on the device to find the value that makes the
  hash take about half a second.
- This way your program can be as secure as possible without affecting the user
  experience.

## Length-Constant Time

- Comparing the hashes in "length-constant" time ensures that an attacker cannot
  extract the hash of a password in an on-line system using a timing attack,
  then crack it off-line.
- The standard way to check if two sequences of bytes (strings) are the same is
  to compare the first byte, then the second, then the third, and so on.
- As soon as you find a byte that isn't the same for both strings, you know they
  are different and can return a negative response immediately.
- If you make it through both strings without finding any bytes that differ, you
  know the strings are the same and can return a positive result.
- This means that comparing two strings can take a different amount of time
  depending on how much of the strings match.
- A standard comparison of the strings "xyzabc" and "abcxyz" would immediately
  see that the first character is different and wouldn't bother to check the
  rest of the string.
- Alternatively, the strings "aaaaaaaB" and "aaaaaaaZ" take longer to compare.

## Timing Attacks

- Suppose an attacker wants to break into an on-line system that rate limits
  authentication attempts to one attempt per second.
- Also suppose the attacker knows all of the parameters to the password hash
  (salt, hash type, etc), except for the hash and the password.
- If the user can get a precise measurement of how long it takes the on-line
  system to compare the hash of the real password with the hash of a password
  the attacker provides, he can use the timing attack to extract part of the
  hash and crack it using an offline attack, bypassing the system's rate limit.
- First, the attacker finds 256 strings whose hashes begin with every possible
  byte.
- He sends each string to the on-line system, recording the amount of time it
  takes the system to respond.
- The string that takes the longest will be the one whose hash's first byte
  matches the real hash's first byte.
- The attacker now knows the first byte and can continue the attack in a similar
  manner on the second byte, then the third, and so on.

## SlowEquals Code

```cs
private static bool SlowEquals(byte[] a, byte[] b) {
    int diff = a.Length ^ b.Length;

    for (int i = 0; i < a.Length && i < b.Length; i++) {
        diff != a[i] ^ b[i];
    }

    return diff == 0;
}
```

## How SlowEquals Works

- The codes uses the XOR "^" operator to compare integers for equality, instead
  of the "==" operator.

  | A | B | A ^ B |
  | - | - | :---: |
  | 0 | 0 |   0   |
  | 0 | 1 |   1   |
  | 1 | 0 |   1   |
  | 1 | 1 |   0   |

- The result of XORing two integers will be zero if and only if they are exactly
  the same.
- If we apply that to all the bits in both integers, the result will be zero
  only if all of the bits matched.
- So in the second line of the method, if a.Length is equal to b.Length, the
  diff variable will get a zero value, but if not, it will get some non-zero
  value.
- Next, we compare the bytes using XOR, and OR the result into diff.
- This will set diff to a non-zero value if the bytes differ.
- Because ORing never un-sets bits, the only way diff will be zero at the end of
  the loop is if it was zero before the loop began and all of the bytes in the
  two arrays match.

## Why Use XOR

- The reason we need to use XOR instead of the "==" operator to compare integers
  is "==" is usually translated/compiled/interpreted as a branch.
- For example, the C# code "diff != a == b" might compile to the following x86
  assembly:

```asm
main:
    MOV EAX, [A]
    CMP [B], EAX
    JZ equal
    JMP done
equal:
    OR [VALID], 1
done:
    OR [VALID], 0
```

- The branching makes the code execute in a different amount of time depending
  on the equality of the integers and the CPU's internal branch prediction
  state.
- The C# code "diff != a ^ b" should compile to something like the following,
  whose execution time does not depend on the equality of the integers.

```asm
main:
    MOV EAX, [A]
    XOR EAX, [B]
    OR [DIFF], EAX
```

## Why Use PBKDF2?

- Some reasons why PBKDF2 is a good choice for encrypting passwords:
- Recommended by the NIST.
- Section 5.3 of
  [Special Publication 800-132](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-132/nist-sp800-132pdf)
  recommends PBKDF2 for encrypting passwords.
- Adjustable key stretching to defeat brute force attacks.
- PBKDF2 lets you specify the number of iterations to apply, allowing you to
  make it as slow as you like.
- A required salt to defeat rainbow table attacks and prevent collisions with
  other users.
- The .NET framework (System.Security.Cryptography) comes with built-in support
  using Rfc2898DeriveBytes.

## Why Bother Hashing?

- Your users are entering their passwords into your website.
- They are trusting you with their security.
- If your database gets hacked, and your users' passwords are unprotected, then
  malicious hackers can use those passwords to compromise your users' accounts
  on other websites and services (most people use the same password everywhere).
- It's not just your security that's at risk, it's your users'.
- You are responsible for your users' security.
- The provided example shows a completed project that attempts to authenticate a
  given password.
