| No. | Topic                                                                                               |
| --- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1   | [App Programming](#app-programming)                                                                 |
| 2   | [Comments](#comments)                                                                               |
| 3   | [using Directive](#using-directive)                                                                 |
| 4   | [Displaying a Line of Text](#displaying-a-line-of-text)                                             |
| 5   | [Simple Types](#simple-types)                                                                       |
| 6   | [String Interpolation](#string-interpolation)                                                       |
| 7   | [Reading a Value into Variable](#reading-a-value-into-variable)                                     |
| 8   | [if Single-Selection Statement](#if-single-selection-statement)                                     |
| 9   | [Formatting Floating-Point Numbers](#formatting-floating-point-numbers)                             |
| 10  | [Do Not Use float or double for Monetary Amounts](#do-not-use-float-or-double-for-monetary-amounts) |
| 11  | [Optional Parameters](#optional-parameters)                                                         |
| 12  | [Named Parameters](#named-parameters)                                                               |
| 13  | [Expression-Bodied Methods](#expression-bodied-methods)                                             |
| 14  | [ref and out Parameters](#ref-and-out-parameters)                                                   |
| 15  | [Iterating Through Arrays with foreach](#iterating-through-arrays-with-foreach)                     |
| 16  | [Multidimensional Arrays](#multidimensional-arrays)                                                 |
| 17  | [Variable-Length Argument Lists](#variable-length-argument-lists)                                   |

# App Programming

- Console apps input and output text in a console window, which in Windows is
  known as the Command Prompt.

## Comments

- A comment that begins with `//` is called a single-line comment, because it
  terminates at the end of the line on which it appears.
- A `//` comment also can begin in the middle of a line and continue until the
  end of that line.
- Delimited comments begin with the delimiter `/*` and end with the delimiter
  `*/`.
- All text between the delimiters is ignored by the compiler.
- A comment that begins with `///` is an XML-style comment, and is used to
  describe classes and methods.
- Typing three slashes at the beginning of a class or method creates a comment
  block that you should fill in:
  ```cs
  /// <summary>
  ///
  /// </summary>
  /// <param name="value"></param>
  /// <returns></returns>
  ```

## using Directive

- A `using` directive tells the compiler where to look for a predefined class
  that's used in an app.
- Predefined classes are organized under namespaces—named collections of related
  classes.
- Collectively, .NET's predefined namespaces are known as the .NET Framework
  Class Library.
- The `System` namespace contains the predefined `Console` class and many other
  useful classes.

## Displaying a Line of Text

- Characters between double quotation marks are strings.
- Whitespace characters in strings are not ignored by the compiler.
- The `Console.WriteLine` method displays a line of text in the console window.
- The string in parentheses is the argument to the `Console.WriteLine` method.
- Method `Console.WriteLine` performs its task by displaying (also called
  outputting) its argument in the console window.
- Unlike `WriteLine`, the `Console` class's `Write` method does not position the
  screen cursor at the beginning of the next line in the console window.

## Simple Types

- C# requires all variables to have a type.
- Instance variables of types `char`, `byte`, `sbyte`, `short`, `ushort`, `int`,
  `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, `float`, `double`, and `decimal` are all given the
  value `0` by default.
- Instance variables of type `bool` are given the value `false` by default.
- Reference type instance variables are initialized by default to the value
  `null`.

## String Interpolation

- Many programs format data into strings.
- C# 6 introduces a mechanism called string interpolation that enables you to
  insert values in string literals to create formatted strings.
- String interpolation inserts values into a string.
- An interpolated string must begin with a `$` (dollar sign).
- Then, you can insert interpolation expressions enclosed in braces, `{}`,
  anywhere between the quotes (`""`).
- When C# encounters an interpolated string, it replaces each braced
  interpolation expression with the corresponding value.
- Verbatim strings can be created using the `@` symbol.
  ```cs
  string s1 = @"C:Windows\System32";
  ```
- Prior to C# 6, substitution parameters were used, starting at `{0}`.
  ```cs
  Console.WriteLine("{0} {1}", "Welcome to C#", name);
  ```
- Composite formatting of parameters: `{Index [, alignment][:formatString]}`
- Index is a number starting from 0 that identifies a corresponding item in the
  list of objects
- Alignment is a signed integer indicating the preferred formatted field width
- Format String is a format string that is appropriate for the type of object
  being formatted

## Reading a Value into Variable

- Console's `ReadLine` method waits for the user to type a string of characters
  at the keyboard and press the Enter key.
- `ReadLine` returns the text the user entered.
- The `int.Parse` method converts this sequence of characters into data of type
  `int`.
- You can also use the `Convert` class:
  ```cs
  int myAge = Convert.ToInt32(input);
  ```
- With similar methods, `ToDouble()`, `ToBoolean()`, `ToChar()`, `ToString()`
- For implicitly typed variables, the compiler determines type based on first
  use:
  ```cs
  var x = 6; var y = 3.5; var z = "Hello";
  ```

## if Single-Selection Statement

- `bool` Simple Type
- Decisions can be based on conditions containing relational or equality
  operators.
- A decision can be based on any expression that evaluates to `true` or `false`.
- C# provides the simple type `bool` for `Boolean` variables that can hold only
  the values `true` and `false` each of these is a C# keyword.

## Formatting Floating-Point Numbers

- Consider:
  ```cs
  Console.WriteLine($"Class average is {average:F}");
  ```
- Outputs the class average.
- The format specifier `F` in the interpolation expression: `{average:F}`
- Typically formats average's value with two digits to the right of the decimal
  point
- The Windows culture settings on the user's machine determine the actual
  format, including the digits to the right of the decimal point, whether commas
  or periods are used for separating thousands, millions, etc.

## Formatting with Field Widths and Alignment

- Consider:
  ```cs
  Console.WriteLine($"{year, 4}: {amount, 20:C}");
  ```
- Displays the year and the amount on deposit at the end of that year.
- The interpolation expression `{year,4}` formats the year.
- The integer 4 after the comma indicates that the value output should be
  displayed with a field width of 4.
- If the value to be output is fewer than four character positions wide (one or
  two characters in this example), the value is right-aligned in the field by
  default.
- If the value to be output were more than four character positions wide, the
  field width would be extended to the right to accommodate the entire value.

## Do Not Use float or double for Monetary Amounts

- For certain values types float and double suffer from what we call
  representational error.
- Floating point numbers often arise as a result of calculations when we divide
  `10` by `3`, the result is `3.3333333...`, with the sequence of `3`s repeating
  infinitely.
- The computer allocates only a fixed amount of space to hold such a value, so
  clearly the stored floating point value can be only an approximation.

## Optional Parameters

- Methods can have optional parameters that allow the calling method to vary the
  number of arguments to pass.
- An optional parameter specifies a default value that's assigned to the
  parameter if the optional argument is omitted.
- You can create methods with one or more optional parameters.
- All optional parameters must be placed to the right of the method's
  non-optional parameters.
- When a parameter has a default value, the caller has the option of passing
  that particular argument.
- For example, the method header specifies an optional second parameter.
  ```cs
  static int Power(int baseValue, int exponentValue = 2) { /* ... */ }
  ```
- Any call to Power must pass at least an argument for the parameter
  `baseValue`, or a compilation error occurs.
- Optionally, a second argument (for the `exponentValue` parameter) can be
  passed to Power.
- Consider the following calls to Power:
  ```cs
  Power();
  Power(10);
  Power(10, 3);
  ```
- The first generates a compilation error because this method requires a minimum
  of one argument.
- The second is valid because one argument (10) is being passed the optional
  `exponentValue` is not specified in the method call.
- The last call is also valid 10 is passed as the required argument and 3 is
  passed as the optional argument.
- In the call that passes only one argument (10), parameter `exponentValue`
  defaults to 2, which is the default value specified in the method's header.
- Each optional parameter must specify a default value by using an equal (=)
  sign followed by the value.

## Named Parameters

- C# provides a feature called named parameters, which enable you to call
  methods that receive optional parameters by providing only the optional
  arguments you wish to specify.
- Explicitly specify the parameter's name and value separated by a colon (`:`)
  in the argument list of the method call.
- For example:
  ```cs
  t.SetTime(hour: 12, second: 22); // Sets the time to 12:00:22
  ```
- The compiler assigns parameter `hour` the argument 12 and parameter `second`
  the argument 22.
- The parameter `minute` is not specified, so the compiler assigns it the
  default value 0.
- It's also possible to specify the arguments out of order when using named
  parameters.
- The arguments for the required parameters must always be supplied.

## Expression-Bodied Methods

- C# 6 introduces a new concise syntax for:
  - Methods that contain only a `return` statement that returns a value.
  - Read only properties in which the get accessor contains only a `return`
    statement
  - Methods that contain single statement bodies.
- Consider the following Cube method:
  ```cs
  static int Cube(int x) { return x * x * x; }
  ```
- In C# 6, this can be expressed with an expression-bodied method as:
  ```cs
  static int Cube(int x) => x * x * x;
  ```
- The value of `x * x * x` is returned to Cube's caller implicitly.
- The symbol `=>` follows the method's parameter list and introduces the
  method's body no braces or return statement are required and this can be used
  with static and non static methods alike.
- If the expression to the right of `=>` does not have a value (e.g., a call to
  a method that returns `void`), the expression-bodied method must return
  `void`.
- Similarly, a read-only property can be implemented as an expression-bodied
  property.
- The following reimplements the `IsNoFaultState` property to return the result
  of a logical expression:
  ```cs
  public bool IsNoFaultState => State == "MA" || State == "NJ" || State == "NY" || State == "PA";
  ```

## ref and out Parameters

- Applying the `ref` keyword to a parameter declaration allows you to pass a
  variable to a method by reference
- The `ref` keyword is used for variables that already have been initialized in
  the calling method.
- Preceding a parameter with keyword `out` creates an output parameter.
- This indicates to the compiler that the argument will be passed by reference
  and that the called method will assign a value to it.
- A method can return multiple output parameters.
- When you pass a variable to a method with a reference parameter, you must
  precede the argument with the same keyword (`ref` or `out`) that was used to
  declare the reference parameter.

## Iterating Through Arrays with foreach

- The `foreach` statement iterates through the elements of an entire array or
  collection.
- The syntax of a `foreach` statement is:
  `foreach (type identifier in arrayName) { statement }`
- `type` and `identifier` are the type and name (e.g., int number) of the
  iteration variable.
- `arrayName` is the array through which to iterate.

## Multidimensional Arrays

- Every element in array a is identified by an array-access expression of the
  form `array[row, column];`
- A two-by-two rectangular array `b` can be declared and initialized with nested
  array initializers as follows: `int[,] b = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}};`
- The initializer values are grouped by row in braces.
- The compiler will generate an error if the number of initializers in each row
  is not the same, because every row of a rectangular array must have the same
  number of columns.
- Elements in a jagged array are accessed using an array-access expression of
  the form `arrayName[row][column]`.
- A jagged array with three rows of different lengths could be declared and
  initialized as follows:
  ```cs
  int[][] jagged = {
      new int[] {1, 2},
      new int[] {3},
      new int[] {4, 5, 6}
  };
  ```

## Variable-Length Argument Lists

- Variable-length argument lists allow you to create methods that receive an
  arbitrary number of arguments.
- The necessary params modifier can occur only in the parameter list's last
  parameter.
