| No. | Topic                                                                                         |
| --- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1   | [Exception Handling](#exception-handling)                                                     |
| 2   | [Enclosing Code in a try Block](#enclosing-code-in-a-try-block)                               |
| 3   | [Catching Exceptions](#catching-exceptions)                                                   |
| 4   | [Uncaught Exceptions](#uncaught-exceptions)                                                   |
| 5   | [The using statement](#the-using-statement)                                                   |
| 6   | [Exception Properties](#exception-properties)                                                 |
| 7   | [Property InnerException](#property-innerexception)                                           |
| 8   | [Other Exception Properties](#other-exception-properties)                                     |
| 9   | [Throwing an Exception with an InnerException](#throwing-an-exception-with-an-innerexception) |
| 10  | [Displaying Information About the Exception](#displaying-information-about-the-exception)     |
| 11  | [User-Defined Exception Classes](#user-defined-exception-classes)                             |
| 12  | [Checking for null References](#checking-for-null-references)                                 |
| 13  | [Null-Conditional Operator (?.)](#null-conditional-operator)                                  |
| 14  | [Operators is and as](#operators-is-and-as)                                                   |
| 15  | [Nullable Types](#nullable-types)                                                             |
| 16  | [Null Coalescing Operator (??)](#null-coalescing-operator)                                    |
| 17  | [Exception Filters and the when Clause](#exception-filters-and-the-when-clause)               |

# Exception Handling

- An exception is an indication of a problem that occurred during a program's
  execution.
- Exception handling enables you to create apps that can handle exceptions in
  many cases allowing a program to continue executing as if no problems were
  encountered.
- Exception handling enables you to write clear, robust and more faulttolerant
  programs.
- A stack trace includes the exception class's name in a message indicating the
  problem that occurred and the path of execution that led to the exception,
  method by method.
- Stack traces help you debug a program.
- The first line of the error message specifies the exception that occurred.
- When a program divides an integer by 0, the CLR throws a
  `DivideByZeroException`.
- Division by zero is not allowed in integer arithmetic.
- A `FormatException` occurs when `int.Parse` receives a string that does not
  represent a valid integer.
- This program terminates when an unhandled exception occurs.
- This does not always happen, sometimes a program may continue executing even
  though an exception has occurred and a stack trace has been displayed.
- In such cases, the app may produce incorrect results.
- The `Int32.TryParse` method converts a `string` to an `int` value if possible.
- The method requires two arguments one is the string to parse and the other is
  the variable in which the converted value is to be stored.
- The method returns a bool value that's true if the string was parsed
  successfully.
- If the string could not be converted, the value 0 is assigned to the second
  argument.
- Method `TryParse` can be used to validate input in code rather than allowing
  the code to throw an exception, this technique is generally preferred.

## Enclosing Code in a try Block

- A `try` block encloses code that might throw exceptions, as well as the code
  that's skipped when an exception occurs.

## Catching Exceptions

- When an exception occurs in a `try` block, a corresponding `catch` block
  catches the exception and handles it.
- At least one `catch` block must immediately follow a `try` block.
- A `catch` block specifies an exception parameter representing the exception
  that the `catch` block can handle.
- Optionally, you can include a `catch` block that does not specify an exception
  type to catch all exception types.

## Uncaught Exceptions

- An uncaught exception (or unhandled exception) is an exception for which there
  is no matching `catch` block.
- If you run the app by using `Debug > Start Debugging` and the runtime
  environment detects an uncaught exception, the app pauses, and the `Exception`
  Assistant appears.

## The `using` statement

- The `using` statement simplifies writing code in which you obtain a resource.
- The general form of a `using` statement is:
  ```cs
  using (var exampleObject = new ExampleClass()) {
      exampleObject.SomeMethod();
  }
  ```
- The using statement code is equivalent to
  ```cs
  {
      var exampleObject = new ExampleClass();
      try {
          exampleObject.SomeMethod();
      } finally {
          if (exampleObject != null) {
              ((IDisposable) exampleObject).Dispose();
          }
      }
  }
  ```

## Exception Properties

- Class `Exception`'s properties are used to formulate error messages indicating
  a caught exception.
- Property `Message` stores the error message associated with an Exception
  object.
- Property `StackTrace` contains a string that represents the method-call stack.
- If the debugging information that's generated by the compiler for the method
  is accessible to the IDE, the stack trace also includes line numbers; the
  first line number indicates the throw point, and subsequent line numbers
  indicate the locations from which the methods in the stack trace were called.
- The IDE creates PDB files to maintain the debugging information for your
  projects.

## Property `InnerException`

- When an exception occurs, a programmer might use a different error message or
  indicate a new exception type.
- The original exception object is stored in the `InnerException` property.

## Other Exception Properties

- Class `Exception` provides other properties:
  - `HelpLink` specifies the location of a help file that describes the problem.
  - `Source` specifies the name of the app or object that caused the exception.
  - `TargetSite` specifies the method where the exception originated.

## Throwing an Exception with an InnerException

- The `Exception` class's two-argument constructor receives the custom error
  message and the `InnerException` to provide as additional information

## Displaying Information About the Exception

- `Exception` method `ToString` returns a string that begins with the name of
  the exception class followed by the `Message` property value.
- The next items present the stack trace of the `InnerExceptionobject`.
- The remainder of the block of output shows the `StackTrace` for the exception.
- The `StackTrace` represents the state of the method-call stack at the throw
  point of the exception, rather than at the point where the exception
  eventually is caught.
- Each `StackTrace` line that begins with `"at"` represents a method on the call
  stack.
- These indicate the method in which the exception occurred, the file in which
  the method resides and the line number of the throw point in the file.
- The inner-exception information includes the inner-exception stack trace.
- When catching and rethrowing an exception, provide additional debugging
  information in the rethrown exception.
- To do so, create an object of an `Exception` subclass containing more specific
  debuging informaton, then pass the original caught exception to the new
  exception object's constructor to initialize the `InnerException` property.

## User-Defined Exception Classes

- In some cases, you might create exception classes specific to the problems
  that occur in your programs.
- User-defined exception classes should derive directly or indirectly from class
  `Exception`.
- Exceptions should be documented so that other developers will know how to
  handle them.
- Userdefined exceptions should define three constructors:
  - a parameterless constructor
  - a constructor that receives a string argument (the error message)
  - a constructor that receives a string argument and an Exception argument (the
    error message and the inner exception object)
- Associating each type of malfunction with an appropriately named exception
  class improves program clarity.
- Before creating a user-defined exception class, investigate the existing
  exceptions in the NET Framework Class Library to determine whether an
  appropriate exception type already exists.

## Checking for null References

- Checking whether a reference is null before using it to call a method or
  access a property avoids `NullReferenceExceptions`.
- Always ensure that a reference is not null before using it to call a method or
  access a property of an object.

## Null-Conditional Operator (?.)

- C# 6's new null-conditional operator (`?.`) provides an elegant way to check
  for `null`.
- The following statement calls Dispose only if `exampleObject` is not null
  `exampleObject?.Dispose();`
- This eliminates the need to wrap the statement in and if statement that checks
  `exampleObject` to see if it's null

## Operators is and as

- Downcasting with operator `is` can cause `InvalidCastExceptions`.
- You can avoid the `InvalidCastException` by using the `as` operator:
  ```cs
  var employee = currentEmployee as BasePlusCommissionEmployee;
  ```
- If `currentEmployee` is a `BasePlusCommissionEmployee`, `employee` is assigned
  the `BasePlusCommissionEmployee`; otherwise, it's assigned `null`.
- `employee` could be `null`, so you must check before using it.
- For example, to give the `BasePlusCommissionEmployee` a 10% raise, we could
  use the following statement, which accesses and modifies the `BaseSalary`
  property only if `employee` is not `null`
  ```cs
  employee?.BaseSalary *= 1.10M;
  ```

## Nullable Types

- Suppose you'd like to capture the value of `employee?.BaseSalary`
  ```cs
  decimal salary = employee?.BaseSalary;
  ```
- This statement actually results in a compilation error indicating that you
  cannot implicitly convert type `decimal?` to type `decimal`.
- Normally a value-type variable cannot be assigned `null`.
- Because the `employee` reference might be `null`, the expression returns a
  nullable type, a value type that also can be `null`.
- You specify a nullable type by following a value type's name with a question
  mark (`?`) so `decimal?` represents a nullable `decimal`.
  ```cs
  decimal? salary = employee?.BaseSalary;
  ```
- indicates that salary either will be `null` or the `employee`'s `BaseSalary`.
- Before using a nullable-type variable's `Value` property, use the `HasValue`
  property to check whether the variable has a value.
- If the nullable-type variable is `null`, accessing `Value` results in an
  `InvalidOperationException`.
- Nullable types have the following capabilities:
  - The `GetValueOrDefault` method checks whether a nullable type variable
    contains a value.
  - If so, the method returns that value; otherwise, it returns the value type's
    default value.
  - An overload of this method receives one argument that enables you to specify
    a custom default value.
  - The `HasValue` property returns `true` if a nullable-type variable contains
    a value; otherwise, it returns `false`.
  - The `Value` property returns the nullable-type variable's underlying value
    or throws an `InvalidOperationException` if the underlying value is `null`.
- Variables of nullable types also may be used as the left operand of the
  null-conditional operator (`?.`) or the null coalescing operator (`??`).

## Null Coalescing Operator (`??`)

- C# also offers the null coalescing operator (`??`) for working with values
  that can be `null`.
- The operator has two operands.
- If the left operand is not null, the entire `??` expression evaluates to the
  left operand's value; otherwise, it evaluates to the right operand's value.
  ```cs
  decimal salary = employee?.BaseSalary ?? 0M;
  ```
- if `employee` is not `null`, `salary` is assigned the `employee`'s
  `BaseSalary`; otherwise, `salary` is assigned `0M`.
- The preceding statement is equivalent to:
  ```cs
  decimal salary = (employee?.BaseSalary).GetValueOrDefault();
  ```
- More elegant and more compact than writing the following equivalent code,
  which must explicitly test for null:
  ```cs
  decimal salary = 0M; if (employee != null) {
      salary = employee.BaseSalary;
  }
  ```

## Exception Filters and the `when` Clause

- Prior to C# 6, you could catch an exception based only on its type.
- C# 6 introduces exception filters that enable you to catch an exception based
  on a catch's exception type and a condition that's specified with a when
  clause, as: `catch(ExceptionType name) when(condition)`
- You also can specify an exception filter for a general catch clause that does
  not provide an exception type.
- This allows you to catch an exception based only on a condition, as:
  `catch when(condition)`
- The exception is caught only if the when clause's condition is `true`
- A typical use of an exception filter is to determine whether a property of an
  exception object has a specific value.
- Following a try block with multiple catch clauses for the same type results in
  a compilation error, unless they provide different when clauses.
- If there are multiple such catches and one does not have a when clause, it
  must appear last; otherwise, a compilation error occurs.
